# 2023-01-29

MAIN GOAL: Planning out work to do on web synth today

Picking up where we left off yesterday.  Finishing up or at least making more progress on the CV outputs for the MIDI editor.

Where we got to yesterday:

 * UI changes, de/serialization changes, plumbing, etc. to get the CV outputs integrated into the MIDI editor component
 * Build out UI to handle CV outputs with collapsible sections, render the ADSR2 inside, handle React<->Svelte interop
 * Make changes to ADSR2 component to make it so that we can zoom into a portion of it to match with MIDI editor scrolling with proper transform handling and all of the other needed changes

What still needs to be done:

 * Need to actually scroll/zoom of the envelope generator with the scroll/zoom of the MIDI editor
 * "Infinite mode" for the ADSR2
   * Rather than having a fixed end point, the envelope generator will continue outputting the final value forever.

Something about this ^ that I just thought of:

We already have the functionality for it to keep outputting the final value once it hits the end.  So, all we have to do is add some UI handling for when the selected window goes beyond the end of the envelope (1).

I just tried testing it with setting the selected window outside of normalized range, and it worked for rendering.  However, it's using "snap last point to end" behavior to set the X for the last point to an invalid non-normalized value.

 * Need to disable that snap-to-end behavior
 * Need to handle non-normalized values from the output of this thing

---

OK, it's working!!  the values in the ADSR are synchronized properly to the zoom state of the MIDI editor, events are getting scheduled properly, and the CV output is outputting accurate CV values!!

Still need to some long-tail items:

 * Configurable min/max value
 * Get rid of the release point in ADSR2 when we are in infinite mode
 * Fix several bugs and missed pieces
   * The virtual end ramp curve isn't updated when adding new points
   * The width of the envelope generator UI is really short in some cases, perhaps when refreshing the page when the MIDI editor VC is not in focus
   * State isn't saving correctly when refreshing the page, used to work...
     * It's just the length.  It seems to be getting normalized when it's saved.
 * Disable phase visualization for the CV outputs
