# 2023-02-20

MAIN GOAL: Line up the primary goals to reduce serious friction when actually using web synth to create music

So, I actually made a little song!  It's more of a tech demo than a song tbh, but it's given me key insight into a few missing gaps that would make the process much easier the next time I create a song.

At a high level, here are the goals:

1. Expand MIDI editor to support multiple instances within one VC.  The should be collapsible and resizable with horizontally tiled windows similar to the VC outputs.  Playback should be sync'd between all of them when local playback is enabled.
2. Add in subgraph support.  I'm not solid on the exact design yet, but my main idea is that you'll be able to add in independent subgraphs that you can plug together in the main graph.

I think they're mostly pretty straightforward.  The MIDI editor muxing is going to take a bit of plumbing to make it backwards compatible with existing state and re-work the scheduling and stuff.  Some optimizations for the future would be avoiding rendering off-screen instances, but not critical for the initial version and it honestly probably wouldn't be that hard anyway.  I think just sticking with multiple WebGL instances for each editor pane is fine.  Something we can fix if it causes problems in the future.

For the subgraph support, things might be more wide-reaching.  The thing is, we have both `CustomAudio` nodes to deal with along with VCs.  If we're going to support adding VCs in subgraphs (which is indeed a requirement), we will need to have these subgraphs live at a very high level.

There are two different approaches I'm thinking of for this:

1. We can do a filtering-type thing where we tag each VC or node with a subgraph ID.  They all exist at the top level in the patch network and Wasm and VCM state and whatnot, and we selectively filter them in the UI.
2. We do some big re-structuring of the whole app state and initialization and whatnot to facilitate multiple independent patch networks that can also connect to each other.  The main benefit of this is that we get to fix some of the very ugly Wasm state stuff that currently exists.

After typing this, I think the choice is extremely clear.  I'm going to do the filtering-based approach.
