# 2023-01-28

Planning notes for the MIDI editor CV outputs.

MAIN GOAL: Plan out work on the MIDI editor control voltage modulation feature

 * Going to be embedded into the MIDI Editor
   * Going to add outputs to the MIDI editor that will be CV corresponding to the output of the envelope
 * Integration into the whole global start/stop system so that it's synced to the MIDI output and other playback

## Integration

 * Will be some way to add bars at the bottom of the MIDI editor so that we can add and remove them dynamically
 * Probably click some button to add them in

## Backend

 * Will probably re-use the existing ADSR2 envelope generator for the backend, just with a different UI

---

Two main remaining tasks:

 * Actually implement the backend support so it generates output sync'd to the global playback state
 * Build the UI for it

## UI

 * Add boxes to the bottom of the MIDI editor which will house the CV outputs and have the envelope editor
 * Should be collapsable so that we can hide them if we're not using them atm
 * Should have controls to change name, delete, change output range, etc.

----

STATUS UPDATE: We've got the envelope generator rendering in the UI.  State change handling and de/serialization is working.

We now need to make some changes/additions to the ADSR2 UI to support only rendering a window of the envelope to support scroll sync with the MIDI editor.  We also need to add support for "infinite" mode where the envelope doesn't have an end point and keeps outputting the final value forever.

OK, so to break that down:

 * Add support for only rendering a certain window of the envelope - optional, opt-in, only for this CV output thing rn.
 * Add support for "infinite mode" where the envelope doesn't have an end point and keeps outputting the final value forever.
