# HTS

**HTS** is an open source [[vocal synthesis]] framework that forms the basis of several other higher-level open source speech synthesis tools including [[sinsy]] and [[open-jtalk]].

Website: <http://hts.sp.nitech.ac.jp/>

At its core, there are voice models ([[htsvoice]] files) which are generated by training on tagged audio.  A speaker speaks a bunch of things, those things are tagged with words, n-grams, or some other stuff, and then a model is built using that training.  The resulting model can then be loaded by HTS and used to generate waveforms based on arbitrary text input.

There is a C library that handles much of the heavy lifting involved with loading HTS voice models: <https://github.com/Ameobea/hts_engine_API>  It is used + imported directly by [[sinsy]]. There's a closely related project called Festival that seems to use at least parts of HTS internally.

## current status

HTS and the surrounding ecosystem is very much past its prime, judging by everything I've seen.  It seems that it's been around for a _very_ long time and that there's been a lot of research and grants and stuff going into it, but there's very little activity in the past 5-10 years at all.

As I do more research and learn more, this isn't very surprising.  The whole thing is built on old, obsolete technology.  Their entire suite of tools is designed for 2000s-era Unix environments; they're doing their work with hidden markov models while the world has moved on to massively powerful bleeding-edge artificial neural networks.

I personally think that investing time into this framework and its associated ecosystem is not worth it at this point in time.  Its time has simply passed.

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[vocal synthesis]: vocal-synthesis "vocal synthesis"
[sinsy]: sinsy "sinsy"
[open-jtalk]: open-jtalk "Open JTalk"
[htsvoice]: htsvoice "htsvoice"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"
