# noise-and-random-node

The **Noise & Random Node** is a node available in the [[graph-editor]] which produces different types of random values.  This node is very useful for the [[modulation]] of other nodes.

## noise type

The noise & random node supports two types of noise:

 * **white noise** - true white noise where each sample is completely random
 * **stepped random** - the same value is output for a given number of samples, at which point it switches to a new random value

## quantization

**A quantization factor of 0 means that no quantization will be performed**

If enabled, quantization limits the number of discrete values that can be output by the noise generator.  The `quantization_factor` parameter corresponds to the number of steps in the quantization.  A value of 1 will result in 2 possible output values (-1 and 1), 2 will result in 3 possible outputs (-1, 0, 1), etc.

## smoothing

If smoothing is enabled, a [[one-pole]] lowpass filter will be applied to noise before being output.  The `smoothing_coefficient` parameter controls how much smoothing is applied and corresponds to the coefficient of the filter.  The closer the smoothing coefficient is to 1, the more smoothing will be applied.

## gain

The output values from this node are multiplied by `gain` before being output by the node.  This gain is applied after all smoothing/quantization.

To do more complicated transformation of the output of this node, use the [[scale-and-shift]] node.

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[graph-editor]: graph-editor "graph editor"
[modulation]: modulation "modulation"
[scale-and-shift]: scale-and-shift "scale and shift"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"
