# Synthesizer V

Website: <https://dreamtonics.com/synthesizerv/>

Came out more recently than [[vocaloid]], actively developed.  Very high quality of sound.  Recent updates support combination concatenative synthesis + machine learning/neural network approach.  There is a free version available that even includes some "lite" versions of soundbanks, meaning that they can only synthesize one pitch.  Even the full version of the software + a full version of one of the voicebanks is still less expensive than [[vocaloid]] alternatives, however.

There is support for Windows, Mac, and Linux.  As I mentioned, the software is reguarly updated with new releases coming out all the time.  Just recently in the past several months, a new release came out with many new features.

## web version
Synthesizer V has a web demo that has the full editing UI and vocal synthesis engine running in the browser via WebAssembly: <https://synthesizerv.com/web/>

Downloading + decompiling the Wasm blob reveals some information about the tool.  Including strings for different internal SynthV functions and modules, it also shows that the [[juce]] framework was used as well as Emscripten.  It's interesting that many very modern WebAssembly features were used including multi-threading and bulk memory operations which I didn't even know were available yet.

## sleepwalking

[[sleepwalking]] is the person who founded Dreamtonics, the company that produces Synthesizer V.  Check his page for more information.

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[vocaloid]: vocaloid "vocaloid"
[sleepwalking]: sleepwalking "sleepwalking"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"
